So thank you again for coming back in for a second time.
Yeah, just really grateful to have you here.
So my first question is, can you tell me about your experience of coming to Wales?
Oh, my experience coming to Wales, it's really nice to place this one.
Wales, especially where I live right now and the town where I live right now.
It's more of a family-oriented, community-oriented place.
You have easy access to the beautiful beaches here.
You have easy access to... I mean, where I am is in town.
I could easily access everywhere I want to go.
And that is more important to me because I'm a single mom.
I don't drive. So that is really essential to me as well.
To roam around without being restricted or being deprived of where you want to go, bringing your child to different places to explore and to learn heritage and culture here as well.
So is that different from other places you've lived in terms of being able to walk around?
Where I lived before in Dubai, you have also freedom there.
Dubai is not like the other country that they said you are deprived to do something.
No, Dubai is an open country also. So you are able to do the worst.
But it's different when Dubai is a more desert place.
But this one, I now understand the balance of me living in a desert place and then coming down here in Wales where you got...
The beautiful thing about this, I always joke with my friends, the beautiful thing here, you got the four seasons in one day.
You got the sunny day, you got the rainy day, you got the windy day, you got the autumn, except the winter.
But you got the autumn, the sunny and the spring in just one day here in Wales.
You got the sunny, you got the rain, you got the wind.
So you can't ask for more for that.
And you want to go to the beaches. So it's nice, it's accessible.
You want to go by bus.
For me, it's very important to me that I'm able to explore different places in my own comfortable time, in my own way.
That I don't have to rely on me driving, looking for parking.
It's very, very essential for me as a mother to bring my child accessible to these different places.
That she able to learn also to maneuver in the country.
Growing up and she was able to maneuver on her own, use the public transportation and learning about the places here.
That's one thing for me, it's really important.
Great.
Is there anything else you'd like to tell me about your experience of coming to Wales?
My experience to Wales when it comes to culture.
Wales people are very, I say, talkative.
They're very friendly, not talkative in a bad way, but talkative.
When you try to communicate, they will inform you in a way they can.
They're very accommodating.
That's the difference.
My experience and also my experience in some Midlands places, they see you as your color.
But here, I feel more safer here.
I feel more freedom here.
That's the really important thing that I can express myself here.
I don't feel like, how do you say it, I don't feel like I'm reserved.
I'm being a love note here.
I'm able to say what I like to say.
I'm able to express what I like to do.
I'm able to showcase my talent here.
I'm able to showcase my painting here.
And they are embracing.
Simple painting, they accept it, put it.
That's the only place that I've done what you call this one.
I've experienced that kind of, you know, it puts you like you are included, you know, not an outcast.
That's the right term.
You feel included in the community, not an outcast.
That's so nice to hear.
Thank you.
I'm really glad that's your experience.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's really, really kind of magical to hear actually.
You mentioned painting.
Yeah.
Could you tell us more about that?
Oh, I do some painting and I showcase it to different painting gallery that they do exhibit there.
Some of my painting got sold, but this time I said I don't want it to be sold.
I don't want it to be in auction.
What I wanted right now is that I wanted people to see this one, to see it, more people to see it.
There's one person who could have it.
I'm glad somebody liked my painting, but this time I wanted more to be reaching people, you know, to see the different culture or background with my painting.
So they've learned that this is what they can picture what is in my painting.
Yeah, for example, if I paint the beautiful scenery of a rice field, the beautiful scenery of a sunset on the rice field, so they would they would picture that this person because it's because I know selling a painting is nice.
But I was thinking it's a part of me.
It's an extension of me.
Those paintings that I have is an extension of me.
So I wanted to be displayed only.
So a lot of people could see it, not just one person in their house could see it.
I understand that I appreciate that they like their painting.
But I want it now.
This time I've learned I don't I don't want selling it.
I don't want the value of the money anymore.
I want it more reaching people, you know, because one time I was in the background.
I was in the I was in the gallery.
And there are people there that was standing in my painting and I was there.
They didn't know who was the painter of that.
So I was just on the back.
And I said most of my paintings said angels.
So it's anonymous.
So they said, oh, this painting is so vibrant.
The color is rich, they said.
And this like the person who paint this one has a lot of has a lot of color.
You can feel, they said, you can feel the vibe of this person with this greenery color and then this silhouette sunset on the painting.
And they said you can feel the person, you know, you can understand the person feeling with this one.
So I was on the back listening to this one and they said it's refreshing.
At the same time, it makes you think deeper on that painting.
So I said, and then I said, so it it it give them something like, you know, something to think, you know, I remember the girl said when that when that painting was being showcased.
And then I said, I think it was I forgot the date, but I'm pretty sure that on that time that painting when that painting was was being shown, I said to I said to myself.
I said to myself, now I don't want to sell it because see they they they how is it like I see the painting they they take the part of the paint.
How you say I don't know how to explain that, but it's like they the person looking on on your painting, they captivated by your feeling.
So it not this only the painting, but they feel you.
That's that's one thing that I've never thought that they could feel through my painting.
They could feel the first the one who painted it.
And she was she was she was right when she said this person was having these two paintings together, the green scenery and the lush of this painting.
And then the sunset. It's she she have this this positive thing of the better future.
And yet you have this she have this painting of you know of of of what's called this one of her of her mind, you know.
So I said I said how on earth they they could they could they could think on that way.
I mean, in though in some of the painting that they could analyze, that's the right word to my painting, they could analyze the feeling of the of the painter or how she was trying or what she was feeling when she's painting it.
Because that that was to I paint because me when I feel sad, my granddad, me and my granddad, and if I for example, come on, if I got scold by my mom or if my mom doing something or my dad doing something and and they want to, you know, and then my dad said, come on, come on, don't mess with your dad.
Let's do painting or don't get upset. Let's do painting now.
So that's what's exactly what's what they make me the reason why I start painting is that when I feel upset or when I want to boost my my mood, I go in painting, then I feel relaxed, then I feel better, then I then I then my mood change, then I can express myself on the painting, then I'm not things that I'm not able to say I'm able to speak, I'm able to do it.
I'm able to do it on my painting. It's like it's an extension of my thought. My painting is extension of my thought. That's exactly how how how how I how I do painting. That's why this time I don't I tell to them to I don't want to sell it.
I just I want people to see that and reach that and see interpret how they want to interpret it. And if they see good in it, and then I want them to see the good in it and apply it to them.
You know, yeah. Beautiful. Thank you.
I'm so curious to see one of your paintings.
I can see one.
This is the one that was been displayed.
This is the one that been sold.
This is the one that was been sold.
That one. But I show it to you where it was been. I think I take picture of it.
I wanted to do abstract as well.
Abstract is when I wanted my daughter to, to, to paint.
And I wanted to learn the abstract way.
This one.
And it was the first time they said that invited me to to paint for it.
I to to display for it.
I said, Oh, I don't think so.
It's the you know, it will be like good to sell or like that.
And she said to me, Oh, good to I don't know somebody would like like to see it.
No, no, no. Just put it in.
And I've never thought it would be like sold.
I was even I was even shocked that it was been sold.
Got lots of picture, but I could find it.
And most of it, the two that was in the exhibit.
I screen shot it.
I remember I screen shot it.
And some of the paintings also that I did is I give it.
I make it as a gift.
I'm wondering with the.
You just told me about painting and why you like painting, what painting gives you.
So this is some of my favorite things.
This one.
This one's dying.
And this one.
And there's another one.
But this is what the one back home.
Before I left, I did some painting there.
But the one that I paint here when I when I stay in Wales.
This one.
Yeah, so that's the one when I stood.
That was exactly where it was placed.
So I was behind them and I was listening to their conversation when they're looking at this one.
You said you see the rich color of this, you know, and then next to it, you see the the the person who was
feeling of this one having this silhouette picture, the silhouette painting.
She was the one when she said to me, when you are free, can you send me a text to go with the picture?
Yeah, so because when I said, but I wanted it, I wanted it on the back of the painting, I said.
But I don't want it to be in in the in the painting in front of the painting, but I want it to be in the back.
So that's my logo there.
It's an angel.
My name is then the angel ring.
Yeah, so that's that was the one that I was standing and then, oh, she they how on earth they would analyze the the because you can see two different.
The rich vibrant color of the green, you know, and then this one.
But I when I explain this to them, this is the rice field of my granddad.
This is the rice field where I grew up and this is this tiny house is the rice field on that.
So people were after their work, after their work, after they're doing all the rice field working, they stay on that one.
They drink, they dance, they play guitar.
They watch that sun, you know, they watch the silhouette there because that were exactly where the where you can see the sun.
Where you can see the sun goes down.
That exactly the place where that house that NEPA house is located.
And that exactly when I when I when I paint this one, I picture of my granddad.
I picture the time that I've spent with my granddad and the place that he he he gave to us.
You know, this this is the land that he gave to my parents, you know, to my from my ancestral.
So when this one when I stood here said what they when they asked me what was the what was the concept of the painting?
You have to give me what was said.
No, we want you to showcase a place where you where you are where you are like your happy place or like your memorable place.
And then that's what I that's this is the painting that I did on that time that I said this is where my childhood mostly and my my whenever whenever not my whole childhood.
But whenever I go to the province with my granddad, this is where the happiest place that I am stayed in the province with my granddad.
That's that's that's exactly the one said.
So this this silhouette, people stay staying there.
People might those farmers staying there just to drink and sip their coffee or their their their native the you know, native liquor to back just to just to watch this one and lost in the space, you know, lost in time.
And then they just go home with relaxing with with with feeling even the whole day work.
But seeing this kind of scenery after work and having just a simple food and they go home relaxed, they're not tired, able to to to feel comfortable.
I could able to bring happiness in their home, you know, that exactly how I feel because they go home.
They get a little bit down.
They laughing.
They are the wife sitting next to the husband.
My grandma was sitting next to my granddad, just watching and talking, you know, playing the guitar and all that stuff.
So it's really, really one of the plays that if I think if I look at this, it makes me it makes my heart like filled with air.
You know, that's how I could say it.
It's like I I was filled with air, you know, whenever I look at this one, I feel happy.
I feel fond about it.
Yeah, it's wonderful.
Thank you.
One of my questions was, can you describe a place or a time in your life that's important to you?
This this feels like.
Yeah, it's yes.
Yes, it's one of the important.
It's one of the important.
And then it's it's very ironic because they said, what is the most one of the most important place to you?
I always say it's home, you know, home, because I always think that I've never come from a broken family.
So I grew up with a family, though I came from an arranged marriage.
But before that happened, I grew up in a in a house that that I have a mom, I have a dad.
You know, I grew I wake up in the morning.
I have my mom and I have my dad.
I know my dad was working for but I know I have a family.
That's really one thing for me.
You know, very important thing to me that I grew up with.
I have a home and I have a family.
Yeah.
So what does home mean to you now?
Is it still that memory of being being younger or when you think of home, do you think of where you live now?
Or to be honest with you, I still think of back home as my home.
But at the moment, we are we are living here.
I pick it because I said my second home is Dubai.
And now that I live here because Dubai never never did the I've never had the bad bad bread with Dubai.
I've always loved I've always want to come back there and go back there.
But right now, where my daughter is where our home now, you know, where we're struggling, where we're starting to have our home.
It's like we're starting to have a life again.
You know, we have a home, we have a family, but now it's like you're building your new home again.
You know, Wales for me is also I could consider it as a comfortable home for me as well.
You know, that is also Wales for me.
I feel I feel I told you I feel I don't feel outcasted here.
I feel like I'm I'm included.
I feel like I'm important, especially when when they say, oh, Angel, we are going to have an exhibit and one of your painting was being chosen to put in there.
You know, like they don't need to do that one.
They don't. But, you know, to feel included in something, it's like it's it's make your heart fond, isn't it?
You know, it makes it makes you give good mood.
You know, that's that's because I did painting, but I put my painting on the in to give it to a friend or give it to.
I don't really keep some of my paintings.
But when I came to Wales, I didn't know Wales or England, the whole England, love art.
I didn't know that one. The whole especially Wales, they have an art museum here.
I didn't know that one, that I have I that one of my painting was being chosen and that one of some of my painting was being sold.
I never thought of it, you know, that, oh, I could I could I could be I could my painting could be included.
You know, I thought it's just for the big, you know, big people who have likes.
Though I don't use I don't use all painting.
I use acrylic. You know, some some some people they said all painting is more valuable, you know, but me using acrylic painting and then people able to appreciate it.
And when I do the texture painting and people said that when they feel it, they feel the hand of the painter.
And that's that's that's what makes me my heart, you know, fun like, oh, my Lord, how on earth they could do my painting, they could express the the the the and they could explain or they how I feel or what they see through my painting.
So they could like it's like the soul, you know, it's like it's like it's if all my painting is this the they looking to my soul, they look at their inner inner inner part of you.
That's how I feel about it, because it's not only one time to time that I stand behind my painting and some people were standing on it.
And they said, oh, it's somebody would like, is this for sale? Is this for sale? So no, it wasn't included in the sale.
Yeah. And then one of my painting was it was in the big wall, but my painting, they put it on the middle because the story stands the story of that that painting stand.
So I was I was really shocked that they picked that one. And I said, I feel privileged and I feel honored that all the big painting, it was my painting that was being put in the middle because the story of it was captivating.
Yeah. And so I'm one of that one was sold in auction and that was been taken. That's why this time I want it. No, I'm not going to sell it. I just let people enjoy to look at it.
Yeah. It's amazing. I'm wondering if you remember from last time that with this interview, there'll be one long recording.
Yeah. So someone edit me out now, for example, so someone can just hear your long story, you know, your long version.
Yeah. But then I'll also take some small bits out to make something called a digital story. Yeah.
Which if you come on the 19th, we'll be showing some of those. And that's a type of storytelling where you have some images and then you have the person's voice on video.
And I think it would be wonderful if we could have a picture of some of your paintings. Sure, sure. Definitely.
To have as the image and then you talking about the audio would be you talking about what painting means to you. Yes, yes, yes.
And how important it is to be included because your message is that everyday people need to be included in the arts too. Yeah, exactly.
You know, making space and how rewarding it can be. Yeah, it is. It is. It is. To get your identity back. Yeah, it is. It is.
Actually, that's what I said that I feel like I'm starting to be whole again through my painting and through it, I could express myself and people who look at it see through to that.
And they could like, I don't understand how I explain it, but the way they see it and the way I stand on the back of them and the way they talk of it, like they can see that the they can see through your soul.
Like they can just feel you from your painting. And that's magical for me that how a painting could boost one feeling or could boost one thought and could go into the deeper thought of somebody.
Because if you just look, it's just a painting, you know, it's just a painting. But some people have a deeper thought when it comes to painting and that other people are those people that talking about the painting, that people don't appreciate the art, the painting.
You know, different, different art. So those people who could explain the art on that and give their personal personal opinion, personal perspective on that painting is like having a window of the personality of the painter.
They can assess, they can picture it on how the painter could feel. And then it like some, because it said this one lighten your mood and this one like gives you in a deeper thought.
Because what exactly the lady said, this painting of a silhouette gives you in the deeper thought of the painter. If you could look on the picture she said to me, as she said to her friend that it's like she is, you know, the person who paint this one is very rich and deep thought.
With her color, color combination, the color combination that she used is also different with the rice field. The combination of the color is totally different. I said, oh, maybe these people are really, they are used of looking on the painting.
Because very, very rare you see the comment, you see comment like that on the painting of anyone could comment on the painting. But that to a specific person, I wanted to, I wanted to come to them, you know, I wanted to approach them.
But I just, I just said I have to, you know, hold myself because they would know I wanted to be, I wanted to be anonymous with all the painting I wanted to run on. That's why I never put my real name on it. I just put Angel on it.
Yeah. So that's, that's really, that's really one thing that I wanted that you can, it's either you can, you can see different meaning. There's always different meaning in painting. It's not just that paint and like that. It's just that picture, no.
Even some photographs, because I love photography. I do, I did study photography for six months, but I only finished three months because when my ex-partner died. But I said in photography also, I like the subject like silhouette, like landscape.
Same, see when I do my painting, I like it to be silhouette and, and I like it to be silhouette and landscape and rice field or anything that landscape.
And so my photography exit, it's the extension of my, of my, of my painting. Like I also wanted to capture from my lenses the scenery of the, the scenery of silhouette. And I have one here, but that picture I kept it because it captivate me also. I think it's still here.
It's in one of my, I don't know if it's here.
This one is one of that.
That's lovely.
That's, that's one of that. And
That one.
Oh, that's lovely. That's beautiful.
And where is that?
That was in the island of Malapasca. They all, this is all the, yeah, in the Philippines. That's when I took photo of this one. I have also few, but I think it's on my, on my memory stick. Yeah. But this one, I've, this one is memorable to me because those people that was the streaming, that one is
is my children. You know, they are my family, my daughter. This is my daughter that's there. And then my son was over there. So when I take this one, so nobody knows who were that. But you see the boat, you see, but
one thing you're gonna think of, who was the person in that, you know, like who were those person and you see the catching people in the, in the, in the sun, what you call the sunset and the race to the, the race goes to the water and then wandering.
Those people were in this picture had, had real people, you know, that's the one thing that from the photography. You're catching real people. Your story is real. You know, that day is real. You can't lie about photography that when you captured it, you know, that that day it was real. That day it was happened.
So that's what exactly what I'm, I'm trying that I catch this when, when this person, when the person is that is my family. So I also, I also paint one of this one, but I put it on my, my, my mom's house, but it was banished by the, it was banished by the Yolanda.
You know, when the typhoon reached Yolanda. Yeah. So that's why I, I reposted on my, on my, my Facebook, like profile picture, because I've lost that painting. So I said, it's, it's okay, because I still have the picture of it. I might lost the painting. I might lost the picture, but I have the original picture of it. That's why I keep it as my profile picture.
Yeah.
So you told me a bit about how painting makes you feel when you're doing photography. How does that make you feel?
It's the same, actually. It's the same. It's just that when, when, when you do it, when you capture it from the lens, you are caught on that time. When you are on the painting, you are, you have your minds and live up.
And I want to call this one. Your space is wild. You don't have, when, when you catch in the photography, you're just focusing on that specific with your lens. But in the painting, you are, your space is unlimited. It's, it's like the universe, you know, that you can put everything on your painting.
Unlimited. There's, there's no, there's no nothing, you know, you can continue putting it, you know, in painting. Once you capture it, that's it. That's it. You cannot edit it. You cannot put it. I know you can photoshop it, but what I mean is to see the real picture, to showcase the real picture.
That's it. You capture that moment. But in painting, you have very wide imagination. Your imagination is unlimited. It's the, you can just paint and they call it, your brain is an ocean. You know, so you have an oceans of idea inside your brain that coming out through your painting.
That's why they said it's very, it's almost, this, I know the word, it takes someone to know, it takes someone to know someone, or it takes someone to know one, or it takes someone to know, it takes one to know someone, or it takes one to know one.
Exactly.
Yeah, those were catching phrases. So people who see on the painting, and they able to, to, to explain or to get into the, the, the, the, the statement of the painting, to capture it as the statement of the painter.
It, it gives you, so somebody could understand my thought that you are not alone or you are, you are not, it's not you or they may call it, it's not, that's only you, you know. You somebody there understand your thought.
Somebody there could understand you. That's exactly what I, what I think of it. You know, it's even in photography. Somebody there could appreciate your photography. Somebody there could, could, could, could see the value of your photography.
But in painting, no, it's, it's unlimited. It's an ocean of, it's an ocean of thought. It's an, it's a, it's a, unlimited, unlimited ideas that you can put into that and you can get out of your brain and, and write it, do it in reality.
That's why I said painting is the extension of your brain, of your inner personality, of your inner thought. That you're putting it to, to, to somebody get the part of your inner thought. Like that's how deep painting for me. Yeah. It's the, the, the, you let them feel or you let them in to your inner thought.
It's wonderful. It's wonderful to talk about, about art and also hear how, you know, how important it is to you and how it makes you feel. I'm just wary of the time and your pick up time. But maybe to wrap up, you could tell me what your hopes are for the future.
Oh, my future hope is that, you know, I'm able to, to manifest a good, a good, a greener pasture. I'm able to provide a good future for my children. I know my children are big, but I still have to, so I want them to be, I just, I just like that I will be healthy to, to see them going up until, until the time that, you know, they could have their own family to guide them.
Now, now that's my thought. And then when it's, when it's for my career, I want it to just take it slowly. Whatever is available for me to do, I would do it. And I would start, I wanted to strive higher and higher and higher. And also with my painting, I would continue doing it.
I would continue doing it. I would continue, you know, things that I would, things that would make me feel alive, happy and positive and, you know, like, how you say, boost your personality and boost your, boost your, your confidence.
Yeah, that I wanted to see, you know, that, that you can still do it, you know, you can, you still have it, you know, nothing can stop you reaching your goal and making your dream come true.
And that's, I really looking for the future that I will be stable with my job. I would be, I would be able to be stable, have a good connection with my children, my two, my two young children. So that's exactly I'm, I'm looking forward for my health as well.
That I'll just be healthy, that able to, to be, to be, you know, just for, for everybody, you know, at least I'm healthy for my whole, for my whole family. I'm able to continue helping them, you know, guiding them.
That's, I really, that's the things that really matter to me is my family, you know, because I think, I think I would be nothing without my family and I would be nothing without, without them, without me being, being present to their life.
I think that's the essence of being a mother as well, you know, presence to their children's life. So I want it to be that, that way. And I always said, I wanted to, I wanted to have, to have a clean living so that my children would see that one as well.
So that my mom have a good clean living, you know, you don't take vices, you don't smoke, you don't drink. Occasionally you just drink, you know, but you know, they see their mom like, then they have to set the standard in their life.
I want them to see, I want them to see their mother who's thrive, who's not big, who's the fighter, who, who is, you know, loving, who is caring, who is like wrapped in all in one. And I am, I am there to be, to be, you know, a guiding foundation for them. That's exactly what I like.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anything else that you'd like to share or you feel is important for us to know before we finish?
You know, being here in UK and being allowed to work here is very important that people, people here to know that.
British people are very, you know, what to call this one? Embracing. It's not that, it's not, I don't feel they say there is, there is like, they call it different individuality.
They have different individuality, but to British people to embrace different, different culture and different, different nationality coming here and they are being accommodative to the people here like me that I'm able to study here, to work here, to live here.
You know, it's one thing that I have a big, huge respect with the British people that they are not closing their doors. Even, even, even some of the government is crying, but still they are very lenient and they're very open, open arms, you know, welcoming people who wants to leave here decently to look for a better future.
And that's one thing I'm very grateful and thankful that I'm able to live here. Even so, circumstances that change, but that one thing that I want, I want people to understand that British people are, are, what to call this one?
British people are blessed to have this country as their own and maybe, maybe they don't see that one, but me as a, coming from a third world country, it's, it's a privilege to, to, to be here and to, to have the same right that you cannot have in the other country.
And that's one thing that I am truly blessed and truly thankful, grateful for that opportunity to live in this country, you know, to be able to be, to be able to be a citizen here and to be able to, to become a part of this country is something that I would be grateful for, for all my life.
Me and my daughter being protected in this country, I know that we're protected here. I know that the law here, they serve the law here and they protect the law here. It's one thing that I can sleep peacefully in the night.
I thought before I couldn't do that one, because I said, oh, this is other country, they maybe protect their own kin, but no, it's, I'm the, I'm the, I'm the living proof for myself that I could speak to that.
British people are blessed to have this country as itself for them. So I'm really honored and glad that I'm able to stay in this country legally, you know, and they got me to stay here with my daughter legally.
Not all, not all are, are, are given the chance, but I, I, I am the one of them that was given the chance and I'm thankful and privileged for that. Yeah.
Well, we're lucky to have you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
I would say we're lucky to have you.
Okay. That was really wonderful.